So let's just see how it works in the same
example we traced through earlier.
So we start out just by initializing
things in the obvious way, so
the shortest path distance
from s to itself we say is 0.
And the shortest path from s to
itself is just the empty path.
And initially, our x is going to be
just the source for text itself.
So, now we enter the main while loop and
so, remember in the while loop,
we say well, let's scan all of the edges
whose tail is in the vertices we've
already looked at, whose tail is in x and
whose head is outside of x.
Now, in this first iteration,
there are two such edges,
there's the edge (s,v) and the edge (s,w).
So how do we know which
of these two to choose?
Well, we evaluate
Dijkstra's Greedy criterion.
And so remember what that is,
Dijkstra's Greedy score for
a given edge (v,w) that's crossing the
frontier is just the previously computed
shortest path distance for the tail of
the arc plus the length of the arc itself.
So at this point,
(s,v) has a greedy score of 0 + 1,
which is 1, and the arc (s,w) has
a greedy score of 0 + 4, which is 4.
So obviously (s,v) is going to
be the shorter of those two.
So we use the edge (s,v), this is playing
the role of v*w* on the previous slide.
And the algorithm then suggests
that we should add v to our set x.
So we suck in v, and
our new x consists of s,
n, v, and it also tells us how to
compute the shortest path distance and
the shortest path from s to v.
Namely, in the A array,
we just write down what
was the Dijkstra's greedy score for this
particular edge, and that was 0 + 1, or 1.
It also tells how to compute
the shortest path for v.
Namely, we just inherit the shortest
path to the tail of the arc,
which in this case, is the empty path from
s to itself and then we tack on the end,
we append the arc we used to get here,
the arc S(v).
So now we go to the next
iteration of the while loop,
so with our new set capital
X consisting of s and v.
And now again, we want to look at all
edges which are crossing the frontier,
edges that have tail in x and
head outside x.
And now we see there's
three such crossing edges.
There's (s,w), there's (v,w),
and there's (v,t).
All of those have the tail in x and
the head outside of x.
So we need to compute Dijksta's greedy
score for each of those three and
then pick the minimum.
So let's go from bottom to top.
So first of all,
we can look at the arc (s,w).
And the greedy score here is the shortest
path distance for the tail, so
it's 0 plus the length of the arc,
which is 4.
So here we get a 4 in this iteration.
Then if we do this cross-bar edge,
this (v,w) edge, the Dijkstra's greedy
score is the A value, or the shortest
path distance value of the tail.
And we computed that last iteration,
that A(V) value is 1,
we add to that the length of the arc,
which in this case is 2.
So this edge (v,w) has a score of 3.
Finally there's the arc (v,t) and
here we're going to add 1, which is
the shortest path distance of the tail of
the arc plus the edge length, which is 6.
So that has the worst score.
So, since the edge (v,w) has the smallest
score, that's the one that guides how we
supplement x and how we compute
the shortest path distances and
the shortest path for
the newly acquired vertex w.
So the changes are,
first of all, we enlarge x.
So x is now everything, but t.
And then how do we compute things for w?
Well, the shortest path, so the r entry
in the A array is just going to be
Dijkstra's greedy score in
the previous iteration.
So that was 1+2, so
it's going to be equal to 3.
And then what is the shortest path?
How do we fill up the array B?
Well we inherit the shortest path to
the tail of the arc, which in this case,
is the arc (s,v) and then we append
the arc that we used to choose
this new vertex w, so
that's the arc (v,w).
So the new path is just the (s,v,w) path,
okay, so
it's what we compute is the shortest
path from s to w in this graph.
So now we proceed to the final
iteration of Dijkstra's algorithm.
We know what vertex we're going to bring
in to x, it's going to be the vertex t,
that's the only one left.
But we still have to compute by
which edge we discovered t and
bring it in to the set x.
So we have to compute the greedy score for
each of the two crossing arcs, (v,t) and
(w,t).
And then this final iteration,
the score for the arc (v,t) is unchanged.
So this is still going to be
the a value of its tail 1,
plus the length of the arc, 6.
So the score here is still 7,
and now for the first time,
(w,t) is a crossing edge of the frontier.
And when we compute its score, it's
the a value of its tail w, which is 3,
plus the length of this arc which is 3,
so I get a greedy score of 6.
So by Dijkstra's greedy criterion,
we picked the edge (w,t) instead of
the edge (v,t), and of course, that
doesn't matter who gets brought into X,
but it does matter how we compute
the A and B values for T.
So in the final iteration, we compute
(a,t) to be the Dijkstra's greedy
score of the edge that we picked, which
is the edge (w,t), and the score was 6.
So we compute the shortest path
distance from s to t to be 6.
And then what is the path itself?
Well, we inherit the shortest path to
the tail of the arc that we used to
discover t, so
that's the shortest path to w,
which we previously computed
as being the path through v.
And then we append the edge we used to
discover t, so we append the edge (w,t).
So the shortest path from s to t,
we're going to compute
as the zigzag path,
s goes to v goes to w goes to t.
And then now, dx is all the vertices,
we've computed it for
everything, this is our final output.
The contents of the, especially
the A array is the final output,
shortest path distances from s to all
of the four possible destinations.
And if you go back and compare this to
the example you went through the quiz,
you will see at least on this example,
indeed Dijkstra's algorithm corrects
the shortest path distances.
Now I've said it before,
I'm going to say it again.
Someone shows you their algorithm
works just on some examples,
especially a pretty
simple four note example,
you should not jump to the conclusion
that this algorithm always works.
Sometimes algorithms work
fine on small examples, but
break down once you go to more
interesting complicated examples.
So I definitely owe you a proof.
The Dijkstra's algorithm works not only
in this network, but in any network.
And actually it doesn't
work in any network,
it's only going to work in any network
with non-negative edge lengths.
So to help you appreciate that, let's
conclude this video with a non example,
showing what goes wrong
in Dijkstra's algorithm
when you have networks with
negative edge lengths.
So before I actually give
you a real non-example,
let me just answer a preliminary question,
which you might have, and
this would be a very good question if
it's something that has occurred to you.
The question would be well, why are these
negative edge links such a big deal?
Why can't we just reduce shortest path
computation with negative edge links
to the problem of computing shortest paths
with non-negative edge links, right?
So why don't we just
sort of clear things out?
We just add a big number to all the edges,
that makes them all non-negative and
then we just run Dijkstra's algorithm and
we're good to go.
So this is exactly the sort of question
you should be looking to ask if
as a computer scientist,
as a serious programmer.
When confronted with a problem,
you always want to look for
ways to reduce it to simpler problems
that you already know how to solve.
And this is a very natural idea of how to
reduce a seemingly harder shortest path
problem to one we already know how
to solve using Dijkstra's algorithm.
The only problem is,
it doesn't quite work.
Why doesn't it work?
Well, let's say you have a graph, and
the most negative edge is minus ten.
So, all the other edge links
are minus 10 and above.
So then, what you want to do is add 10
to every single edge in the network, and
that ensures that all
the lengths are non-negative.
Run Dijkstra's algorithm,
get your shortest path.
The issue is that different paths
between a common origin and
destination have differing
numbers of edges.
So, some might have five edges,
some might have two edges.
Now, if you add 10 to every
single edge in the graph,
you're going to change path
lengths by different amounts.
If a path has five edges, it's going to go
up by 50 when you add 10 to every edge.
If a path has only two edges,
it's only going to go up by 20
when you add 10 to every edge.
So as soon as you start changing the path
lengths of different paths by different
amounts, you might actually screw
up which path is the shortest.
The path which is shortest
of the new edge lengths
need not be the one the shortest
under the old edge lengths.
So that's why this reduction doesn't work.
To be concrete, let's look at this
very simple three vertex graph where
vertices s, v, and t and
edge lengths as shown 1, -5 and -2.
Now what I hope is clear is that
in this graph, the shortest path,
the one with the minimum length,
is the too hot path, s, v, t.
That has length minus 4.
The direct s,t arc has length minus 2,
which is bigger than minus 4.
So the upper path is the shortest path.
Now suppose we try to massage this by
adding a constant to every edge so
that all edge links were non-negative.
We have to add 5 to every edge, because
that's the biggest negative number,
the (v,t) edge.
So that would give us new edge
lengths of 6, and 0, and 3.
And now the problem is, we have changed
which path is the shortest one.
We added 10 to the top half and
only 5 to the bottom half and
as a result, they've reversed.
So now the bottom path (s,t) is
actually the shorter one, so
if you run Dijkstra's on this graph,
it's going to come back with a path (s,t),
even though that's not in fact
the shortest path in the original network,
the one that we actually care about, okay.
So that's why you can't just naively
reduce shortest paths with negative edge
lengths to shortest paths with
non-negative edge lengths.
Moreover, on this very same
super simple three nug graph,
we can try running Dijkstra's
shortest path algorithm.
It's perfectly well defined,
it'll produce some output,
but it's actually going to be wrong.
It is not going to compute shortest path
distances correctly in this graph, so
let me show you why.
Of course, the initialization will work as
it always does, so it's going to start by
saying the shortest path distance from
s to itself is 0 by the empty path.
And then, what's it going to do next?
It's going to say, okay, well, we need to
enlarge the set capital, x, by one vertex,
and there are two crossing edges as
the (x,v) edge and the (s,t) edge.
And what's it going to do?
It's going to use
the Dijkstra's greedy score.
So, the score of this upper
edge is going to be 1,
and the score of this bottom
edge is going to be minus 2.
because remember, you take the previously
computed shortest path value of the tail,
that is 0 in both cases, and
then you add the edge length.
So the edge lengths are 1 and minus 2,
so the scores are 1 and minus 2.
Which of these is smaller?
Well evidently, the (s,t) arc
has the smaller score, minus 2.
So what is Dijkstra's
algorithm going to do?
It's going to say, yes,
let's go for this edge, (s,t).
Let's bring T into the set capital X.
T is now part of the conquered territory.
And of course, as soon as you bring a node
into the set X, into conquered territory,
you have to commit or
Dijkstra's algorithm chooses
to commit to its shortest path
distance and its shortest path.
What is the definition of its shortest
path distance, as computed by Dijkstra?
Well it's just a greedy score.
So it's going to assign the vertex t,
the shortest path distance of minus 2,
and the path is going to be just the arc,
(s,t).
But notice that this is in fact wrong.
The shortest path distance from s
to t is not minus 2 in this graph.
There's another path,
namely the one that goes through v,
that has length minus 4,
less than minus 2.
So Dijkstra computes incorrect
shortest path distances
on this trivial three note graph.
So to summarize the story so far,
we've described Dijkstra's algorithm.
I've showed you that it works in a very
simple example that doesn't have
negative edge lengths.
And I've showed you that it doesn't
work in an even simpler example that
does have negative edge lengths.
So I've both given you some plausibility
that it might work generally, at least for
non negative edge lengths, but I've
also tried to sow some seeds of doubt.
That it's not at all clear at this
point if Dijkstra's algorithm is always
correct or not, even if you
have non negative edge lengths.
And certainly,
if it is always correct, there better
be a foolproof argument for why.
You should be demanding
an explanation of a claim
that Dijkstra is correct
in any kind of generality.
That's the subject of the next video.